Okay.
NOTE CONF
We have the red light to go.
So it's Friday.
NOTE CONF
Your numbers have decreased further.
Maybe this is unsurprising for a Friday.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yesterday we looked at eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
While we looked at the definition of an eigenvalue and
NOTE CONF
an eigenvector.
Today is all about actually finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So at the end of yesterday we just reached the
point where we saw.
NOTE CONF
To calculate an eigenvalue you essentially have to solve this
equation.
NOTE CONF
So lambda times the identity um minus whatever matrix you
want.
NOTE CONF
And you find the determine to that you want to
make it equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
So in order to get going today.
Here is a first question to warm us all up.
NOTE CONF
Get our brains working for Friday lunchtime.
There is a matrix.
NOTE CONF
What are the eigenvalues of the matrix?
Uh, I will give you the hint that they are
NOTE CONF
all between the values of one 0 to 5.
Uh, what do I want to do?
NOTE CONF
That's what I want to do.
They are all between 0 and 5.
NOTE CONF
They shouldn't.
Actually, this is quite a nice matrix to find the
NOTE CONF
determinant of.
So hopefully shouldn't be too bad.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going to give you too long but
just to warm up.
NOTE CONF
What are the eigenvalues for that.
Is that a hand up.
NOTE CONF
Know something at the corner of my eye okay.
Feel free to have a chat with your friend.
NOTE CONF
We essentially want to find this determinant.
Let's think about what that means.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully this isn't too bad.
Oh, we've reached a third of voters.
NOTE CONF
Then we seem to have stalled.
I'm going to give you an extra.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you an extra 15 seconds.
We seem quite happy there, actually.
NOTE CONF
Lots of people voting.
I'm going to give you another 10s.
NOTE CONF
Five seconds.
Two, one.
NOTE CONF
And magically, it's all going to appear.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we all seem fairly happy that it is
one, 2 or 5.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Well done everyone.
NOTE CONF
It's one, two and five.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
We have a brain even though it's a Friday.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully we all kind of got to something like
this.
NOTE CONF
And then we think about the term to this matrix.
We can expand along the first column.
NOTE CONF
And then so it's lambda minus one times the determinant
of this two by two which relatively clearly hopefully should
NOTE CONF
be lambda minus two lambda minus five.
And that all equals zero.
NOTE CONF
So our three roots are one, two and five.
Are we all fairly happy with that.
NOTE CONF
Yay happy people.
I'm going to bounce a bit because I feel like
NOTE CONF
we're all asleep, so if I'm energetic, maybe that will
pass on.
NOTE CONF
The downside of this is I will crash halfway through
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so we found eigenvalues.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
Hopefully not too terrible.
Do we all agree?
NOTE CONF
Good.
So how do we actually find eigenvalues?
NOTE CONF
It turns out you find eigenvalues by casting your mind
back to the last time I was here on a
NOTE CONF
Friday when we were solving systems of equations.
Yeah, everyone's favourite thing to do.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's what we're doing again.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
So wonderful calculation.
To kick off our Friday, let us find the eigen
NOTE CONF
vectors for our matrix A.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
So each eigenvalue is going to have a different eigenvector
because that kind of follows from the definition.
NOTE CONF
So we need to do to find the eigenvectors of
this matrix.
NOTE CONF
That's the word we're going to have to do three
times.
NOTE CONF
Yay.
Who's really going to talk on a Friday for a
NOTE CONF
somewhat long calculation.
Um so let us start.
NOTE CONF
We're going to look at our first eigenvalue lambda equals
one okay.
NOTE CONF
So we want to consider the matrix one.
There's a secret one there that we don't write because
NOTE CONF
it's one minus a.
And if we think about what that matrix is.
NOTE CONF
yell at me when I make a sign error, but
I'm just going to write this down and hopefully you'll
NOTE CONF
all agree we should end up with that.
Do we all somewhat agree?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I'm agreeing with myself.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so so we've got to that matrix and we
are trying to find the, the the solving that homogeneous
NOTE CONF
system thing to bear in mind with an eigenvector.
Let's think about what we talked about yesterday.
NOTE CONF
These are the directions the lines that get mapped to
themselves the directions fixed lines.
NOTE CONF
That is a line.
Do you remember when way back when we were actually
NOTE CONF
solving homogeneous systems, when we knew the answer was geometrically
a line?
NOTE CONF
What did we kind of expect to come out of
our system?
NOTE CONF
What do we expect the rank to be, for example?
I had someone whisper not three.
NOTE CONF
Yes, we do not expect the rank to be three.
Or do we expect the rank to be?
NOTE CONF
If we're expecting like two, wonderful.
We expect at least one free verbal.
NOTE CONF
If we have a line, we expect a free verbal.
And so far we're looking good.
NOTE CONF
We've got a column of zeros.
So we're definitely not rank three.
NOTE CONF
So yeah, we're looking good okay.
We're now going to do a bit of a reduction.
NOTE CONF
Yay.
Um does anyone have a first step they think we
NOTE CONF
should do before actually we do anything.
Multiplied by negative.
NOTE CONF
Multiplied by negative one.
I like that one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so we've discussed this briefly yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes you have lambda times the identity minus a, sometimes
you have a minus lambda times the identity.
NOTE CONF
If you do it this way, the identity minus A,
you end up with a lot of negative signs generally.
NOTE CONF
So it's worth just let's times everything by minus one.
Um, cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We've changed everything by minus one.
NOTE CONF
That's good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Let's then do a bit of row reduction.
So I'm going to start by swapping.
NOTE CONF
Which two shall I swap.
First and second.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I like that okay.
First and second.
NOTE CONF
So we've now got 010023 and 044.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh what do we do next?
Subtract two times the third one from the rotate.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
So who's going to go to row two?
NOTE CONF
Minus two.
Lots of row 10100.
NOTE CONF
I know this does get a bit dull.
You've done this a lot now.
NOTE CONF
And what should I do for the last row?
No one can be good.
NOTE CONF
Still worth practising because you will do this a lot.
And if you can do it in your sleep, you
NOTE CONF
can do it in the exam.
Okay, so there is the matrix.
NOTE CONF
Anything else I should do?
One last step maybe.
NOTE CONF
2 or 3.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's do that.
001.
NOTE CONF
And we could we'll leave it on trust that you
can get rid of that fall.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so we are in reduced row echelon form,
actually, because everything's zeros and ones.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we have no leading one at the bar.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Um, like, we have no leading one in the first
NOTE CONF
column.
So what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
What is our free variable going to be?
The first one.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we're thinking about general solutions we're going to
NOTE CONF
set X to be a free variable.
Then what's y going to be.
NOTE CONF
Good zero.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
There was someone put A0A fist with zero fingers up.
I'm taking that to be zero.
NOTE CONF
What is that going to be.
Yes I like the the yes okay.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Wonderful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we have to zero zero at general solution looks
NOTE CONF
like x, y z looks like T00.
So I can factor out that t and we get
NOTE CONF
a we get a nice vector there.
Wonderful.
NOTE CONF
What's our eigenvector.
100.
NOTE CONF
Wonderful.
Actually I disagree with you.
NOTE CONF
The eigenvectors 200.
Who's right?
NOTE CONF
Who's wrong?
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
We're all right.
Wonderful.
NOTE CONF
It's a Friday.
Everyone can be correct today.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it doesn't matter, frankly, because it's a line.
I care a lot about the direction.
NOTE CONF
I don't really care the magnitude of this line.
So yes 100 is an eigenvector but so is 200.
NOTE CONF
So is -2020 400.
So is pick your favourite number zero zero.
NOTE CONF
They're all eigenvectors.
So we're expecting a line of solutions.
NOTE CONF
This is just saying go off in the x direction
and don't do anything in y and Z Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we all kind of happy with how we did
that?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Generally, you probably would write 100.
NOTE CONF
You want to be as nice as possible.
You probably want to reduce it to the lowest common
NOTE CONF
factors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that was our first one.
Let us do our second one.
NOTE CONF
So our second eigenvalue is two.
I'm not going to do all three.
NOTE CONF
But I am going to do two because something special
happens or two.
NOTE CONF
Um so we've now lost the matrix A let's bring
the matrix A there you go.
NOTE CONF
There's a matrix A so if I think about what
lambda times the identity.
NOTE CONF
Well, two lots of the identity minus that matrix is
again telling me when I make a mistake, but I
NOTE CONF
make it to be minus one, minus two, minus three
0000, minus four.
NOTE CONF
What's the last number?
Minus three.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy with how we got there?
I think the first one is.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, the first one is a one.
Good.
NOTE CONF
See.
Everyone has a Friday brain.
NOTE CONF
Be careful with minus.
Sounds good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we have one minus two minus c.
We've got two zeros.
NOTE CONF
Again with quite obviously rank two.
This is looking good.
NOTE CONF
We're going to have a free variable okay.
So let's reduce again I'm going to do this a
NOTE CONF
bit quickly because hopefully we're all good with row reduction.
Uh so I'm going to move that row to the
NOTE CONF
bottom.
Everyone happy I might make a mistake.
NOTE CONF
So do follow along and yell at me when I
make a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I'm actually just going to divide by
four.
NOTE CONF
Actually, this ones.
I don't think I have made a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, I have made a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, actually, I can keep those signs.
Yeah, that's what I get.
NOTE CONF
Do we all somewhat agree?
I swapped the rows.
NOTE CONF
I times the first row by nothing at times.
The second row I divided by minus four.
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Don't do maths quickly.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what's off?
We verbal in this case going to be Z.
NOTE CONF
Good Z equals t.
Um, what should I take y to be?
NOTE CONF
Minus three.
T yes.
NOTE CONF
Minus three quarters d.
Good okay.
NOTE CONF
And x.
Plus two.
NOTE CONF
One.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So it's two y plus three z.
And if you stick that in terms of teas, you're
NOTE CONF
going to get minus three halves of tea plus three
tea, which is three halves of tea.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy people?
Wonderful.
NOTE CONF
So the eigenvector I can factor out the tea and
I'm going to have, uh, three halves minus three quarters
NOTE CONF
one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We could do that.
Equally we would probably most people probably.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This eigenvector as you go on and do stuff with
NOTE CONF
eigenvectors.
We don't care about the size.
NOTE CONF
So what might we want to do with that eigenvector
in particular multiplied by four.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Let's get rid of the.
NOTE CONF
Whole.
Let's learn to multiply by four.
NOTE CONF
Um there we go.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's get rid of the fractions where possible.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are we.
Still.
NOTE CONF
All good?
Right.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to do the last one.
I'm going to leave that one to you.
NOTE CONF
I will give you the answer and let you double
check this.
NOTE CONF
But lambda equals five is the last one.
Um, and you should end up with your third eigenvalue
NOTE CONF
to be minus three zero four, I hope, um, go
forth and check that at some point.
NOTE CONF
But there you go.
Are we all happy with how to find eigenvectors?
NOTE CONF
Good.
It's slightly long winded, but not actually too hot.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's the same method you've been using for five
weeks now, um, in various different guises.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
So that is how to find eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
So that's all good.
NOTE CONF
Um what if though.
So that was quite nice.
NOTE CONF
I had two I had three eigenvectors and I had
three eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
What if when we find our characteristic polynomial, though, we
end up with a double root?
NOTE CONF
What do we think could happen then?
So let's think about another matrix.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to call this one B just to change
stuff up a bit.
NOTE CONF
Let's think about this matrix.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What are the eigenvalues there.
If we just yell at me.
NOTE CONF
One zero and one.
Good.
NOTE CONF
But if we think about the characteristic polynomial, it's actually
going to be lambda lambda minus one squared.
NOTE CONF
So we've only got two roots but we've kind of
got three eigenvalues because lambda is a repeated eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what's happening here.
NOTE CONF
What do people think's going to happen when we find
eigenvectors one.
NOTE CONF
Has two parameter two three.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So let's just consider I mean finding the eigenvectors for
NOTE CONF
zero, I will leave you to do.
Let's consider the eigenvectors for one.
NOTE CONF
If we do the identity minus this matrix, we're going
to end up with minus one, minus seven plus 17
NOTE CONF
minus eight 000000.
What ranks that matrix one.
NOTE CONF
So how many free free variables do we have.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Wonderful.
So we could times everything by minus one to make
NOTE CONF
this nice and quickly solve it.
And we're going to get y equals one free variable
NOTE CONF
z equals another free variable.
And x is going to be 17.
NOTE CONF
Lots of t minus eight lots of s.
And if we solve this I appreciate I'm doing this
NOTE CONF
relatively quickly.
We're going to have 17 one zero plus zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Minus eight zero one okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So we now have two basic solutions, and both of
them are eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we actually have two eigenvectors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is quite funky.
We so we did the algebra.
NOTE CONF
We found two roots.
This is known as the.
NOTE CONF
So yeah every eigenvalue has a corresponding eigenvector.
And if you find a double root when you're doing
NOTE CONF
your determinant that is known as the algebraic multiplicity.
If you find a triple root it's got multiplicity three.
NOTE CONF
So it's how much when you do the all the
algebra how often does your root appear.
NOTE CONF
That's known as the algebraic multiplicity.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But let's start thinking geometrically.
We like thinking geometrically.
NOTE CONF
What is happening geometrically when I have got two eigenvalues?
Do you get it?
NOTE CONF
I get a plane.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So instead of having a fixed line, instead of a
line being mapped to itself, I've now got a whole
NOTE CONF
plane that's getting mapped to itself.
So you can think about it as a reflection in
NOTE CONF
3D.
That mirror gets reflected to itself.
NOTE CONF
So the eigenvalues of that mirror, well they're going to
have eigenvector one, but it's going to have two parameters.
NOTE CONF
So that mirror gets mapped entirely to itself.
And we get a fixed plane.
NOTE CONF
And that is the geometric multiplicity.
So how many eigenvectors you get for your algebraic multiplicity
NOTE CONF
is your geometric multiplicity.
Does that make sense.
NOTE CONF
So you have the algebra that gives you how many
times an eigenvalue appears.
NOTE CONF
And then for every eigenvalue you have.
Different.
NOTE CONF
Number of eigenvectors that can appear.
And that's your geometric multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
So far, so happy still?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So the transformation.
Applied by matrix B it's reflecting it out.
NOTE CONF
So this one um yeah actually this one, this one's
not a reflection because we've got eigenvalue zero.
NOTE CONF
So if it was a reflection you'd only have eigenvalues
one and minus one.
NOTE CONF
That's what we saw yesterday.
But here we've got a plane.
NOTE CONF
So the plane spanned by these two vectors a plane.
Anything that can be written like this, um is fixed
NOTE CONF
by this matrix.
And then everything that's not on that plane is kind
NOTE CONF
of where it's got eigenvalue zero.
So that's getting what happens if you have eigenvalue zero
NOTE CONF
actually.
Let's go back to the definition.
NOTE CONF
What happens if your eigenvalue zero you will get mapped
to the origin.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So you get pushed down to everything.
NOTE CONF
So actually if we think about this a bit, this
matrix here, it's got a plane that's being fixed and
NOTE CONF
everything else is being mapped to the origin.
So it's kind of collapsing everything just down to the
NOTE CONF
plane.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So for each.
Line that was presented by those two classic solutions, we
NOTE CONF
think of the map.
To itself and very linear combination which is represented by
NOTE CONF
the plane as well.
So it's going to also be mapped to itself.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Because even if I have say if I have three
NOTE CONF
lots of this vector plus two lots of this vector,
well three lots of that vector is getting mapped to
NOTE CONF
three lots of that vector.
And two lots of that one is getting mapped to
NOTE CONF
that one.
And we know linear transformation is respect addition.
NOTE CONF
So it's still going to be those three.
Lots of that plus two lots of that.
NOTE CONF
So we get exactly the plane gets exactly mapped to
itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any other questions or Queries or comments.
NOTE CONF
But actually that's quite good if we think about what
we just did there geometrically, just by looking at the
NOTE CONF
eigenvalues and eigenvectors, we could tell what that matrix did
geometrically.
NOTE CONF
I can't look at that matrix off the top of
my head and go, that is pushing everything is observing
NOTE CONF
the plane and taking everything else down to the origin.
But we can do that with the eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
That is, the power of eigenvalues and eigenvectors is.
They allow us to do the geometry without doing any
NOTE CONF
geometry, which is nice because in higher dimensions I can't
draw things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we know if the eigenvalue has an eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
So how does the algebraic multiplicity and the geometric multiplicity
relate to each other?
NOTE CONF
Which one's got to be bigger than the other one.
One's got to be bigger than the other.
NOTE CONF
Which one.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
The outbreaks got to be bigger because for every algebraic
one, you can't have more eigenvectors than you can eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
No.
Hang on.
NOTE CONF
I said that completely backwards and all that.
You can't have more eigenvectors than you do.
NOTE CONF
The number of eigenvalues, each eigenvalue even repeated, only gives
you at most one eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
So we know that the algebraic multiplicity is bigger than
the geometric multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So we actually have this inequality.
NOTE CONF
We also know both of them are bigger than one.
Because if you have one eigenvalue, you have a eigenvector
NOTE CONF
by definition.
If you do not have an eigenvector, then you're not
NOTE CONF
an eigenvalue.
So they come in a pest.
NOTE CONF
You have at least one eigenvector, but you don't have
to have all of the.
NOTE CONF
So this we will see it in a bit a
case where we have algebraic multiplicity but not geometric multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
So we don't have two eigenvectors.
We only have one eigenvector.
NOTE CONF
Even though the eigenvalue appears twice.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
I feel like we kind of went boring calculation boring
calculation calculation hard.
NOTE CONF
But the theory we're about to go back to born
calculation.
NOTE CONF
But does anyone have questions about the spiking theory?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Let me get back to finish.
I think I.
NOTE CONF
Got.
It.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So we got two eigenvectors because our eigenvalue appeared twice,
NOTE CONF
but it's not always the case.
Even if your eigenvalue appears multiple times, that doesn't guarantees
NOTE CONF
you one eigenvector, but it doesn't guarantee you two eigenvectors
for example.
NOTE CONF
So we'll see that in a in a bit.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're actually going to go back to somewhat boolean
calculation now.
NOTE CONF
Um yay.
Hopefully or not.
NOTE CONF
Not yay.
Um, hopefully by now you've realised we like diagonal matrices.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone give me a reason why we like diagonal
matrix?
NOTE CONF
What do they make life really easy for?
The determinants.
NOTE CONF
Easy, yeah.
What else?
NOTE CONF
Multiplications.
Easy.
NOTE CONF
What else did I have?
Finding the inverse.
NOTE CONF
Why is finding the inverse of a diagonal matrix really
easy?
NOTE CONF
Yeah it's basically the reciprocal.
More or less you find the reciprocal of everything on
NOTE CONF
the diagonal.
Um why is it easier to interpret transformation.
NOTE CONF
What is the diagonal transformation doing?
It's a combination of matrices.
NOTE CONF
So it's really easy to think of a combination of
those.
NOTE CONF
Yeah exactly.
And we know geometrically what the elementary matrices are doing.
NOTE CONF
So actually it's quite easy to interpret.
It's easy to calculate with we like diagonal matrices.
NOTE CONF
If we have a matrix like that, though, that's less
nice.
NOTE CONF
I mean, that one's got a load of zeros in.
That's not too bad.
NOTE CONF
I'm picking ones of loads of zeros in deliberately.
But, um, if you had a big matrix they're not
NOTE CONF
with not zeros in they're less nice.
So you have to think about inverses and determinants and
NOTE CONF
things.
So we actually want things to be diagonal.
NOTE CONF
We want we prefer diagonal matrices.
So we're going to diagonalise our matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um this is a very typical mass thing.
We have a diagonal matrix.
NOTE CONF
We want to make something diagonal.
So we make diagonal a verb and call it diagonalise.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we are diagonalising our matrix.
Um there we go.
NOTE CONF
So when are we diagonalisable?
When can we make a matrix diagonal?
NOTE CONF
It's when we've got some matrix P where Papp holds
p inverse AP equals our diagonal matrix D for some
NOTE CONF
matrix P.
Later on we'll see.
NOTE CONF
This is known as a similar relationship, but don't worry
about that too much at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Um, but we need to know that such a P
exists.
NOTE CONF
You cannot always diagonalise a matrix, but you can sometimes.
And when you can, that's what we mean.
NOTE CONF
We mean that p inverse a p equals a diagonal
matrix D.
NOTE CONF
So let us think about why this preserves all our
nice diagonal things.
NOTE CONF
Um so one thing that we said was nice was
we could, uh, multiply diagonal matrices together nicely.
NOTE CONF
Let's actually just think about taking a power.
Taking a power of a diagonal matrix isn't bad.
NOTE CONF
Um, we know if this is the same as d
times d.
NOTE CONF
If we're diagonalisable, then we have p inverse a p
times p inverse a p.
NOTE CONF
How does that simplify?
Brilliant.
NOTE CONF
P inverse a squared p.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So say, if I actually wanted to find a squared.
How can I find a squared?
NOTE CONF
How can I rearrange this?
Brilliant.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
I can now find a squared.
NOTE CONF
That's a lot easier than doing matrix multiplication with the
three by three, which doesn't have zeros in.
NOTE CONF
Particularly when we see the finding p is actually quite
easy.
NOTE CONF
So suddenly it's easy to square matrices.
Um, what do we know about the determinant of of
NOTE CONF
this.
So when we have a p inverse AP equals d
NOTE CONF
what do we know about the determinant.
This is the product of that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the weak easily find the determinant of D.
NOTE CONF
And we know the determinant of p and p inverse
are reciprocal.
NOTE CONF
Determinants are just numbers.
So actually we can quite easily see the determinant of
NOTE CONF
A is just the determinant of d.
And I can do that one.
NOTE CONF
That's an easy calculation.
So determinants are nice to um and equally finding inverses
NOTE CONF
is good.
And we'll talk more about interpreting transformations when we talk
NOTE CONF
about similar matrices more generally okay.
So diagonal matrices this does retain the properties we want
NOTE CONF
to retain.
It's really nice.
NOTE CONF
So how do we find P.
I've said it's kind of easy.
NOTE CONF
Um so we're diagonalisable.
If our eigenvectors can form a matrix like that which
NOTE CONF
is invertible.
So what I mean there is you take your first
NOTE CONF
eigenvector as your first column.
Your second eigenvector is the second column.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Third eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
Your third column.
Keep going, keep going, keep going.
NOTE CONF
So all you've got to do is find your eigenvectors
and then bung them together in a matrix.
NOTE CONF
You don't actually have to do anything more with that.
Um, and then if we have it our diagonal matrix
NOTE CONF
is really nice.
It's just the eigenvalues again eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
Making life really easy.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we know we're diagonalisable.
If that matrix is invertible, is there a shortcut to
NOTE CONF
working out for that invertible.
Because that's also a bit of a tricky calculation.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Uh, no eigenvector is good.
NOTE CONF
So even if your eigenvector is zero, you can still
that means your matrix is not invertible, but that we're
NOTE CONF
not trying to invert A we're trying to invert P,
which is our new matrix.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
At the back.
NOTE CONF
So the determinant of the matrix A or the determinant
of P.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We want to determine a p not to be zero.
NOTE CONF
But again working out the determinant of a disease and
its p is going to allow us to prove that
NOTE CONF
A is easy.
But P is a different matter altogether.
NOTE CONF
And actually we have a result to do this.
So that theorem just gave us those two results.
NOTE CONF
Turns out we're diagonalisable.
If every eigenvalue of some algebraic multiplicity has m corresponding
NOTE CONF
basic eigenvectors, or to put it in the language we
just said, your algebraic multiplicity always equals your geometric multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we are diagonalisable because yes we
had algebraic multiplicity two, but we also had geometric multiplicity
NOTE CONF
two.
So for every eigenvalue including repeats we have a different
NOTE CONF
eigenvector.
If that happens then we're all good and happy.
NOTE CONF
And we're diagonalisable.
Are people happy so far?
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay, so, did I have anything else I wanted to
NOTE CONF
say here?
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Kind of corollary, if you've not got any repeated eigenvector
NOTE CONF
values at all, then you would definitely diagonalisable.
Because of that inequality, we know every eigenvalue has to
NOTE CONF
have an eigenvector.
So if you've got and we know that there are
NOTE CONF
going to be n eigenvalues for an n by n
matrix.
NOTE CONF
So if you've got n distinct eigenvalues you've got to
have n distinct eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
And you've not got to go any further.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let us do a bit.
Of.
NOTE CONF
Um a bit of practice here.
How am I going to get this all up on
NOTE CONF
the board.
Oh I'm going to do something I've not done before,
NOTE CONF
and I'm going to put both of these up.
This is exciting.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let us go back to.
NOTE CONF
Is that working?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
No.
Why are you both showing the same side?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Brilliant.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let us go back to this matrix A.
What would the matrix P be for this matrix A?
NOTE CONF
What is the first column going to be.
One zero is zero good.
NOTE CONF
What's the second column going to be.
Minus three.
NOTE CONF
Therefore I'll take that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And what's the last column going to be.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then what's the corresponding vector D.
What's the diagonal.
NOTE CONF
I don't even have to do a matrix multiplication.
This is nice.
NOTE CONF
What's d going to be.
152 on the diagonal here.
NOTE CONF
And zeros everywhere else.
Done.
NOTE CONF
That's easy.
Hopefully you just copied out what you've already worked out.
NOTE CONF
You've not got to do anything more.
Are we all happy with how to find a diagonal
NOTE CONF
matrix?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Does it matter?
Not at all.
NOTE CONF
So provided that the eigenvector corresponds to the eigenvalue in
your diagonal matrix, that's fine.
NOTE CONF
So we could have written these 1006 minus three four
minus three zero four and swapped the two and the
NOTE CONF
five.
But this also.
NOTE CONF
Works.
So there's not one answer.
NOTE CONF
There were several answers.
However many ways you want to order your eigenvectors, all
NOTE CONF
of them are going to give you a diagonal matrix.
Any other questions or queries or thoughts?
NOTE CONF
In which case, let's do a question.
Um, so there we go.
NOTE CONF
And Eigen.
A matrix has double eigenvalue one with that corresponding eigenvector,
NOTE CONF
and eigenvalue three with that corresponding eigenvector is a diagonalisable.
I will give you.
NOTE CONF
Oh hang on, you can't see this at all, can
you?
NOTE CONF
Oh.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
And magically appeared.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I will give you 30 odd seconds to think about
this.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to have a chat with your neighbour.
Okay, I'm going to give you another few.
NOTE CONF
What should we have?
Let's have another 20s.
NOTE CONF
10s.
Let's have a late rush of votes, five seconds or
NOTE CONF
however long it takes me to walk back over to
the screen.
NOTE CONF
Four.
Three.
NOTE CONF
Two.
One.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we seem tossed up.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We all seem quite happy that it's that it's not
too good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, then it's a toss up between 1 and 3.
So three seems the most popular.
NOTE CONF
What are we saying?
There is not invertible and not n by n.
NOTE CONF
Uh, number of eigenvalues equals the number of eigenvectors.
Um, well what we've got two eigenvalues and two eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So that looks nice.
Um, columns are identical and P is therefore not invertible.
NOTE CONF
The algebraic multiplicity of eigenvalue one does not cause one
to its geometric multiplicity.
NOTE CONF
What does?
What does that mean?
NOTE CONF
What someone saying there.
Is only two vectors.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So this this eigenvalue, we're counting twice.
It's got one and one.
NOTE CONF
So we've actually got three eigenvalues one, one and three
and two eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
So we are not diagonalisable.
Actually um this one I can can see why you
NOTE CONF
think that this is, you know, this is a classic,
classic thing people do.
NOTE CONF
They go, well, it's got eigenvalue one.
There you go.
NOTE CONF
But you might as one of those comments said, this
has got a repeated column.
NOTE CONF
So it's not invertible.
Um, this is invertible.
NOTE CONF
I can't find the inverse.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, let's do one more like that.
NOTE CONF
So here's another matrix with eigenvalue one and a double
eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Is this one diagonalisable.
And if so what is p and d?
NOTE CONF
I'll give you another 30s to think about this one.
That's a very similar question.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going to give you too much longer.
Give you ten more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Five more seconds.
Three more.
NOTE CONF
Seconds.
Two, one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, good.
So lots of people saying one.
NOTE CONF
What are the comments?
Both the correct.
NOTE CONF
Both are correct.
I have no idea.
NOTE CONF
You made a good guess though.
And sometimes that is good enough.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So we seem quite happy that it is this one.
Um, I've taken my eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
I've smushed them together into a matrix, and I've labelled
the corresponding columns with the eigenvector value.
NOTE CONF
The eigenvalue.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, lots of people said too though.
And some of those comments were saying both were correct.
NOTE CONF
What what's going on there?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
No.
NOTE CONF
You you've spoken less today you know.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So all I've done in this one is swap to
NOTE CONF
these two eigenvectors.
There's nothing special about the order of an eigenvector at
NOTE CONF
all.
So actually yay!
NOTE CONF
Both of them are correct.
Yay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Does anyone have any questions?
NOTE CONF
Thoughts?
Feelings?
NOTE CONF
Complaints?
Queries?
NOTE CONF
Comments?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So the first question we have just so one but
two proponents of double eigenvalue.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I think we split it up into two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Linear combination of tobacco like here vectors up there.
So actually if we so if we think about what's
NOTE CONF
going on in this case, we are preserving a plane.
We've got two we've got two eigenvalues.
NOTE CONF
We're preserving the plane.
Um, so geometrically, anything that plane is mapped to, uh,
NOTE CONF
I double by two is mapped to double itself.
But that plane is kind of, um, preserved as a
NOTE CONF
play.
In the second case, though.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
That's the wrong question.
NOTE CONF
Uh, in this case, um, we've got eigenvalue one is
occurring twice, but it's only preserving the line.
NOTE CONF
You can kind of think of it as like preserving
the line twice.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so it's a doubly preserved line, but you've
not got that plane, so you've only got a line
NOTE CONF
that's fixed by one, and then you've got this other
line fixed by three.
NOTE CONF
Um, there are reasons later on that we will come
to about what you need to preserve the whole space
NOTE CONF
in some degree or another.
So you need three directions that are kind of, uh,
NOTE CONF
either fixed or mapped to zero.
And at the moment you've not got that, you've got
NOTE CONF
one line that's fixed, another line that's fixed, and then
you've kind of got a third dimension that's doing something,
NOTE CONF
but it's not being a linear, it's not being invertible.
Um, so we can't diagonalise it later on.
NOTE CONF
We when we do kind of Jordan normal form and
other forms of diagonalization, we'll see what actually is happening
NOTE CONF
in that case.
Um, so, so it might kind of the crux of
NOTE CONF
my answer is C later linear bits of linear algebra,
which I appreciate is disappointing.
NOTE CONF
Um, but yeah, essentially this is only fixing a line
was when you've got eigenvalue two eigenvectors, you're fixing a
NOTE CONF
plane.
And we kind of want to fix the same dimension
NOTE CONF
space as we do eigenvalues.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Is that a question?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
How is it possible?
Even though the region values repeat, that we still have
NOTE CONF
only one practice.
I saw what you said before.
NOTE CONF
When it's repeated, it means that there are going to.
Be playing and therefore.
NOTE CONF
So when it's repeated algebraically, that doesn't guarantee that a
plane is fixed.
NOTE CONF
It just means um.
So for example you can have that.
NOTE CONF
In this case you can have the line is fixed
but kind of twice I am glossing over some geometry
NOTE CONF
here.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you've kind of got the line fixed twice
as opposed to a plane of solutions being fixed.
NOTE CONF
So yes, the eigenvalues counted twice algebraically, but geometrically that's
not matching up.
NOTE CONF
Those two values.
They're not d and they're just yeah.
NOTE CONF
There's just t.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Actually, if we think about if we think about that
matrix and we think about what happens with one, we're
NOTE CONF
going to end up with three minus two, minus three,
two, zero, minus two, zero minus two, and then minus
NOTE CONF
one, minus two minus one.
Which if you think about these two rows, actually if
NOTE CONF
you think about that that's a degenerate matrix altogether.
Um, so that's what's going on there.
NOTE CONF
Um, and why it's not working.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so one other thing I just want to say
kind of before the end, that's more or less I
NOTE CONF
do need a bit of time at the end.
Uh, two things I want to say.
NOTE CONF
Firstly, sometimes you have to check this.
It's always worth checking your answer, partly because it's a
NOTE CONF
good check to make sure you actually work at your
eigenvectors correctly.
NOTE CONF
So you might be tempted to do that.
Matrix multiplication do p inverse AP equals D.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone think of an easier way of doing this
calculation?
NOTE CONF
What's the hard bit of doing that calculation?
Yeah I don't want to find p inverse but I'm
NOTE CONF
quite happy to do that.
That's a lot easier.
NOTE CONF
So if you're doing a check try not to check
that.
NOTE CONF
Check that you should do a check.
Checks a nice.
NOTE CONF
That's a much easier check than than the other one.
Um, the other thing I want to say is to
NOTE CONF
kind of go back to where this all started.
Um, so I've kind of said linear transformations have eigenvectors
NOTE CONF
and eigenvalues.
Um, it turns out every matrix has an eigenvalue at
NOTE CONF
least one and at least one eigenvector.
Therefore, um, but yesterday we said that rotations don't fix
NOTE CONF
lines.
That's the one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, rotations don't.
Fix.
NOTE CONF
Lines.
What does a rotation fix?
NOTE CONF
The plane distance of.
Actually, that's a good point.
NOTE CONF
If we're preserving distance, then we're preserving the circle.
So actually I can go back to this picture.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have preserved I have preserved a line.
This is not a straight line.
NOTE CONF
It's a curved line.
Um, turns out that in a rotation, you do have
NOTE CONF
eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Um, but your eigenvalue is complex.
NOTE CONF
How many people have seen complex numbers?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Decent fortune for you.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'm not going to go into this right now,
but I am going to in the reading video.
NOTE CONF
In the reading quiz, I'm going to put an extra
video at the end that U is absolutely optional and
NOTE CONF
goes into a down a weird rabbit hole of maths
into conic sections and stuff.
NOTE CONF
Feel absolutely free to skip it.
It will mainly be me getting excited over conic sections
NOTE CONF
and explaining why these are imaginary eigenvalues.
But that's what's happening there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, before you go.
One last thing though.
NOTE CONF
So that is everything on this week's reading.
Um, I will warn you now, next week's reading, you
NOTE CONF
again.
Have me, for better or for worse.
NOTE CONF
Next week's reading is not different.
Most of you should be somewhat familiar with most of
NOTE CONF
it.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
It's basically basic vector theory.
Um, so it's somewhat okay content wise, hopefully, but there's
NOTE CONF
quite a lot of it.
So I'm going to try and release the reading a
NOTE CONF
slightly earlier.
Um, just so you have a chance to maybe flick
NOTE CONF
through it.
It's basically all of chapter four.
NOTE CONF
It's quite long, but it should not be too taxing.
Um, and then the last thing I want to say
NOTE CONF
is we've still got five minutes.
Don't pack up yet.
NOTE CONF
Um, I do not know how many of you have
seen this, but, um, if you go to the stack
NOTE CONF
page.
We have the mid-semester feedback form.
NOTE CONF
Some of you have filled this in.
Some of you have not.
NOTE CONF
Please.
Now I am giving you a couple of minutes to
NOTE CONF
sit and fill in this form.
Please do fill in this form.
NOTE CONF
Let us know how we are getting on, how the
tutors are getting on, and we will get back to
NOTE CONF
you about your feedback.
So you will have, at some point, someone standing here
NOTE CONF
and explaining how we are going to be better for
you.
NOTE CONF
So it does have an impact.
So yeah, have a couple of minutes to do that
NOTE CONF
and then please leave through the front again as we
did yesterday.
NOTE CONF
I am here for any questions.
It's optional.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to do it.
But please do do it.
NOTE CONF
It's nice to have some feedback.
Otherwise I'll see you all next week.
NOTE CONF
Have a nice weekend.